.TH CCOMP 1
.SH NAME
ccomp \- the CompCert C compiler
.
.SH SYNOPSIS
\fBccomp\fP [\fIoptions\fP] \fIfile ...\fP
.
.SH DESCRIPTION
\fBCompCert C\fP is a compiler for the C programming language.
Its intended use is the compilation of life-critical and mission-critical software written in C and meeting high levels of assurance.
It accepts most of the ISO C 99 language, with some exceptions and a few extensions.
It produces machine code for the PowerPC (32bit), ARM (32bit), x86 (32bit and 64bit), and RISC-V (32bit and 64bit) architectures.
.PP
What sets CompCert C apart from any other production compiler, is that it is formally verified, using machine-assisted mathematical proofs, to be exempt from miscompilation issues.
In other words, the executable code it produces is proved to behave exactly as specified by the semantics of the source C program.
This level of confidence in the correctness of the compilation process is unprecedented and contributes to meeting the highest levels of software assurance.
In particular, using the CompCert C compiler is a natural complement to applying formal verification techniques (static analysis, program proof, model checking) at the source code level: the correctness proof of CompCert C guarantees that all safety properties verified on the source code automatically hold as well for the generated executable.
.
.SH RECOGNIZED SOURCE FILES
.
.TP
.B .c
C source file.
.
.TP
.BR .i ", " .p
C source file that should not be preprocessed.
.
.TP
.B .s
Assembly file.
.
.TP
.B .S
Assembly file that must be preprocessed.
.
.TP
.B .o
Object file.
.
.TP
.B .a
Library file.
.
.SH OPTIONS
.SS General Options
.INDENT 0.0
.
.TP
.B \-conf <file>
Read CompCert configuration from <file>. This takes precedence over any other specification.
.
.TP
.B \-target <triple>
Read CompCert configuration from <triple>.ini instead of using the default of compcert.ini.
The configuration file is searched for in the share directory of the CompCert installation.
.
.SS
Toolchain Options (PowerPC with Diab Backend)
.TP
.B \-t <tof>:<env>
Select target for Diab toolchain. The option is forwarded to the Diab toolchain and has no effect on the code generated by CompCert.
<tof> denotes the \fIt\fParget processor, \fIo\fPbject file format and \fIf\fPloating point support.
<env> denotes the execution \fIenv\fPironment.
.
.SS Processing Options
.INDENT 0.0
.
.TP
.B \-c
Compile to object file only (no linking), result in <file>.o.
.
.TP
.B \-E
Preprocess only, send result to standard output.
.
.TP
.B \-S
Compile to assembly only, save result in <file>.s.
.
.TP
.B \-o <file>
Generate output to <file>.
.
.SS Preprocessing Options
.INDENT 0.0
.
.TP
.B \-I<dir>
Add <dir> to search path for include files.
.
.TP
.B \-include <file>
Process <file> as if \fB#include "<file>"\fP appears at the first line of the primary source file.
.
.TP
.B \-D<symbol>=<value>
Define a preprocessor symbol.
.
.TP
.B \-U<symbol>
Undefine a preprocessor symbol.
.
.TP
.B \-Wp,<args>
Pass comma separated arguments in <args> to the preprocessor.
.
.TP
.B \-Xpreprocessor <arg>
Pass argument <arg> to the preprocessor.
.
.TP
.BR \-C ", " \-CC ", " \-idirafter ", " \-imacros ", " \-iquote ", " \-isystem ", " \-M ", " \-MF ", " \-MG ", " \-MM ", " \-MP ", " \-MQ ", " \-MT  ", " \-nostdinc ", " \-P
For GNU backends these options are recognized by CompCert and passed through to the preprocessor.
.
.SS
Optimization Options
.INDENT 0.0
.
.TP
.B \-O
Optimize the compiled code.
Enabled by default.
.
.TP
.B \-O0
Turn off most optimizations.
Synonymous to \fB\-fno\-const\-prop\fP \fB\-fno\-cse\fP \fB\-fno\-redundancy\fP \fB\-fno\-tailcalls\fP.
.
.TP
.BR \-O1 ", " \-O2 ", " \-O3
Synonymous for \fB\-O\fP.
.
.TP
.B \-Os
Optimize for code size in preference to code speed.
.
.TP
.BR \-fconst\-prop ", " \-fno\-const\-prop
Turn on/off global constant propagation.
Enabled by default.
.
.TP
.BR \-fcse ", " \-fno\-cse
Turn on/off common subexpression elimination.
Enabled by default.
.
.TP
.BR \-finline ", " \-fno\-inline
Turn on/off inlining of functions.
Enabled by default.
.
.TP
.BR \-finline\-functions\-called\-once ", " \-fno\-inline\-functions\-called\-once
Turn on/off inlining of functions only required by a single caller.
Enabled by default.
.
.TP
.BR \-fredundancy ", " \-fno\-redundancy
Turn on/off redundancy elimination.
Enabled by default.
.
.TP
.BR \-ftailcalls ", " \-fno\-tailcalls
Turn on/off optimization of function calls in tail position.
Enabled by default.
.
.TP
.B \-ffloat\-const\-prop <n>
Control constant propagation of floats (<n>=0: none, <n>=1: limited, <n>=2: full).
Default is full constant propagation.
.
.SS
Code Generation Options
.INDENT 0.0
.
.TP
.B \-falign\-functions <n>
Set alignment of function entry points to <n> bytes.
The default alignment is 16 bytes for x86 targets and 4 bytes for ARM and PowerPC.
.
.TP
.BR \-ffpu ", " \-fno\-fpu
Turn on/off use of FP registers for some integer operations.
Enabled by default.
.
.SS
Code Generation Options (PowerPC)
.INDENT 0.0
.
.TP
.B \-falign\-branch\-targets <n>
Set alignment of branch targets to <n> bytes.
The default alignment is 0 bytes, which deactivates alignment of branch targets.
.
.TP
.B \-falign\-cond\-branches <n>
Set alignment of conditional branches to <n> bytes.
The default alignment is 0 bytes, which deactivates alignment of conditional branch targets.
.
.SS
Code Generation Options (PowerPC with Diab Backend)
.INDENT 0.0
.
.TP
.B \-fsmall\-const <n>
Set maximal size for allocation in small data constant to <n> bytes.
The default is 8 bytes.
.
.TP
.B \-fsmall\-data <n>
Set maximal size for allocation in small data area to <n> bytes.
The default is 8 bytes.
.
.SS
Code Generation Options (ARM Targets)
.INDENT 0.0
.
.TP
.B \-mthumb
Generate code using the Thumb 2 instruction encoding.
This is the default if CompCert is configured for the ARMv7R profile.
.
.TP
.B \-marm
Generate code using the ARM instruction encoding.
This is the default if CompCert is configured for a profile other than ARMv7R.
.
.SS
Assembling Options
.INDENT 0.0
.
.TP
.B \-Wa,<args>
Pass comma separated arguments in <args> to the assembler.
.
.TP
.B \-Xassembler <arg>
Pass argument <arg> to the assembler.
.
.SS
Debugging Options
.INDENT 0.0
.
.TP
.B \-g
Generate full debugging information.
.
.TP
.BR \-g0 ", " \-g1 ", " \-g2 ", " \-g3
Control generation of debugging information (0: none, 1: only globals, 2: globals and locals without locations, 3: full debug information). The default level is 3 for full debug information.
.
.SS
Debugging Options (GNU Backend)
.INDENT 0.0
.
.TP
.B \-gdwarf-<n>
For GNU backends select debug information in DWARF format version 2 or 3.
The default format is DWARF v3.
.
.SS
Linking Options
.INDENT 0.0
.
.TP
.B \-l<library>
Link library <library>.
.
.TP
.B \-L<dir>
Add <dir> to search path for libraries.
.
.TP
.B \-Wl,<args>
Pass comma separated arguments in <args> to the linker.
.
.TP
.B \-WUl,<args>
Pass comma separated arguments in <args> to the driver program used for linking.
.
.TP
.B \-Xlinker <arg>
Pass argument <arg> to the linker.
.
.TP
.B \-s
Remove all symbol table and relocation information from the executable.
.
.TP
.B \-static
Prevent linking with the shared libraries.
.
.TP
.B \-T <file>
Use <file> as linker command file.
.
.TP
.B \-u <symbol>
Pretend the symbol <symbol> is undefined to force linking of library modules to define it.
.
.TP
.BR \-nodefaultlibs ", " \-nostartfiles ", " \-nostdlib
For GNU backends these options are recognized by CompCert and passed through to the linker.
.
.SS
Language Support Options
.INDENT 0.0
.
.TP
.BR \-fbitfields ", " \-fno\-bitfields
Turn on/off support for emulation bit fields in structs.
Disabled by default.
.
.TP
.BR \-flongdouble ", " \-fno\-longdouble
Turn on/off support for emulation of \fBlong double\fP as \fBdouble\fP.
Disabled by default.
.
.TP
.BR \-fpacked\-structs ", " \-fno\-packed\-structs
Turn on/off support for emulation of packed structs.
Disabled by default.
.
.TP
.BR \-fstruct\-passing ", " \-fno\-struct\-passing\fR
Turn on/off support for passing structs and unions by value as function results or function arguments.
Disabled by default.
.
.TP
.BR \-funprototyped ", " \-fno\-unprototyped
Turn on/off support calls to old-style functions without prototypes.
Enabled by default.
.
.TP
.BR \-fvararg\-calls ", " \-fno\-vararg\-calls
Turn on/off support for calls to variable-argument functions.
Enabled by default.
.
.TP
.BR \-finline-asm ", " \-fno\-inline-asm
Turn on/off support for inline \fBasm\fP statements.
Disabled by default.
.
.TP
.B \-fall
Activate all language support options above.
.
.TP
.B \-fnone
Deactivate all language support options above.
.
.SS
Diagnostic Options
.INDENT 0.0
.
.TP
.B \-Wall
Enable all warnings.
.
.TP
.B \-W<warning>
Enable the specific warning <warning>.
CompCert supports the following warning classes:
.sp
\fIc11\-extensions\fP:
Feature specific to C11.
Disabled by default.
.sp
\fIcompare\-distinct\-pointer\-types\fP:
Comparison of different pointer types.
Enabled by default.
.sp
\fIcompcert\-conformance\fP:
Features that are not part of the CompCert C core language, e.g. K&R style functions.
Disabled by default.
.sp
\fIconstant\-conversion\fP:
Dangerous conversion of constants, e.g. literals that are too large for the given type.
Enabled by default.
.sp
\fIextern\-after\-definition\fP:
Extern declarations after non-extern definitions.
Enabled by default.
.sp
\fIflexible\-array\-extensions\fP:
Use of structs with flexible arrays nexted within structs or arrays.
Disabled by default.
.sp
\fIgnu\-empty\-struct\fP:
GNU extension for empty structs.
Enabled by default.
.sp
\fIignored\-attributes\fP:
Attribute declarations after definitions.
Enabled by default.
.sp
\fIimplicit\-function\-declaration\fP:
Deprecated implicit function declarations.
Enabled by default.
.sp
\fIimplicit\-int\fP:
Type of parameter or return type is implicitly assumed to be int.
Enabled by default.
.sp
\fIinline\-asm\-sdump\fP:
Use of unsupported features in combination with dump of abstract syntax tree.
Enabled by default.
.sp
\fIint\-conversion\fP:
Conversion between pointer and integer.
Enabled by default.
.sp
\fIinvalid\-noreturn\fP:
Functions declared as noreturn that actually contain a return statement.
Enabled by default.
.sp
\fIliteral\-range\fP:
Floating point literals with out-of-range magnitudes or values that convert to NaN.
Enabled by default.
.sp
\fImain\-return\-type\fP:
Wrong return type for main.
Enabled by default.
.sp
\fImissing\-declarations\fP:
Declations which do not declare anything.
Enabled by default.
.sp
\fIpointer\-type\-mismatch\fP:
Use of incompatible pointer types in conditional expressions.
Enabled by default.
.sp
\fIreduced\-alignment\fP:
Alignment specifications lower than natural alignment.
Disabled by default.
.sp
\fIreturn\-type\fP:
Void-return statement in non-void function.
Enabled by default.
.sp
\fIstatic\-in\-inline\fP:
Use of static variables in non-static inline functions.
Enabled by default.
.sp
\fItentative\-incomplete\-static\fP:
Use of tentative static definitions with incomplete type.
Disabled by default.
.sp
\fIunknown\-attributes\fP:
Use of unsupported or unknown attributes.
Enabled by default.
.sp
\fIunknown\-pragmas\fP:
Use of unsupported or unknown pragmas.
Disabled by default.
.sp
\fIunused\-ais\-parameter\fP:
Unused parameter for embedded program annotations.
Disabled by default.
.sp
\fIunused\-variable\fP:
Unused local variables.
Enabled by default.
.sp
\fIvarargs\fP:
Promotable vararg arguments.
Enabled by default.
.sp
\fIwrong\-ais\-parameter\fP:
Use of illegal parameter expressions for embedded program annotations.
Enabled by default.
.sp
\fIzero\-length\-array\fP:
GNU extension for zero length arrays.
Disabled by default.
.
.TP
.B \-Wno-<warning>
Disable the specific warning <warning>.
.
.TP
.B \-w
Suppress all warnings.
.
.TP
.B \-Werror
Treat all warnings of CompCert as errors.
.
.TP
.B \-Werror=<warning>
Treat the specific warning <warning> as an error.
.
.TP
.B \-Wno-error=<warning>
Prevent the specific warning <warning> from being treated as error even if \fB\-Werror\fP is specified.
.
.TP
.B \-Wfatal-errors
Treat all errors of CompCert as fatal errors, so that the compilation is aborted immediately.
.
.TP
.B \-fmax\-errors=<n>
Print at most <n> error messages before bailing out.  Defaults to <n>=0 which means unlimited error messages.
.
.TP
.B \-fdiagnostics\-format=<format>
Select format for location information in messages.  Possible formats are \fBccomp\fP (default), \fBmsvc\fP or \fBvi\fP.
.
.TP
.BR \-fdiagnostics\-color ", " \-fno\-diagnostics\-color
Turn on/off colored diagnostics.  Enabled by default for TTY output devices.
.
.TP
.BR \-fdiagnostics\-show-option ", " \-fno\-diagnostics\-show\-option
Turn on/off printing of option name with mappable diagnostics.  Enabled by default.
.
.SS
Tracing Options
.INDENT 0.0
.
.TP
.B \-dprepro
Save C file after preprocessing in <file>.i
.
.TP
.B \-dparse
Save C file after parsing and elaboration in <file>.parsed.c.
.
.TP
.B \-dc
Save generated CompCert C in <file>.compcert.c.
.
.TP
.B \-dclight
Save generated Clight in <file>.light.c.
.
.TP
.B \-dcminor
Save generated Cminor in <file>.cm.
.
.TP
.B \-drtl
Save RTL at various optimization points in <file>.rtl.<n>.
.
.TP
.B \-dltl
Save LTL after register allocation in <file>.ltl.
.
.TP
.B \-dmach
Save generated Mach code in <file>.mach.
.
.TP
.B \-dasm
Save generated assembly in <file>.s.
.
.TP
.B \-dall
Save all generated intermediate files in <file>.<ext>.
.
.TP
.B \-sdump
Save abstract syntax tree of generated assembly for post-linking validation tool in <file>.json.
.
.SS
Miscellaneous Options
.INDENT 0.0
.
.TP
.B \-stdlib <dir>
Set the path of the CompCert run-time library to <dir>.
.
.TP
.B \-v
Print external commands before invoking them.
.
.TP
.B \-timings
Print information about the time spent in various compiler passes.
.
.TP
.B \-version
Print the CompCert version information and exit.
.
.TP
.B @<file>
Read command line options from <file>.
.
.SS
Interpreter Mode
.INDENT 0.0
.
.TP
.B \-interp
Execute the given .c files using the reference interpreter.
.
.TP
.B \-quiet
Suppress diagnostic messages for the interpreter.
.
.TP
.B \-trace
Have the interpreter produce a detailed trace of reductions.
.
.TP
.B \-random
Randomize execution order.
.
.TP
.B \-all
Simulate all possible execution orders.
.
.SH ENVIRONMENT
.
.TP
.B COMPCERT_CONFIG
If this environment variable is present, it denotes the path to the CompCert configuration file to be used.
The variable takes precedence over default search paths or the \fB\-target\fP option, but has a lower priority than the \fB\-conf\fP option.
.
.SH BUGS
.
To report bugs, please visit <https://github.com/AbsInt/CompCert/issues>.
